---
title: Planning for Banff Trip
authors: Simon Li
layout: default
date: 2024-03-24
keywords: machine learning
tags: ml
published: true
---


## Banff

### Accomodations

Royal Canadian Lodge

Elk & Avenue

Rimrock Hotel

Banff Springs Hotel

Alternative: Canmore

### Scenary

Surprise Corner

Bow Falls 

Banff Gondola

Vermilion Lakes

Two Jack Lake

Lake Minnewanka


Johnston Canyon

## Lake Louise 

On route to Lake Agnes

## Visit Lake Moraine

Visitors who wish to visit Moraine Lake will have three options in 2024:

1. **Take the Parks Canada Shuttle**
   
    Visitors can reserve a seat in advance on a *Parks Canada shuttle* to see Moraine Lake. Shuttle fares include the Lake Connector route between Moraine Lake and Lake Louise, allowing visitors to see both lakes in one day. *40%* of tickets are released for *reservation in the spring*. The remaining *60%* of seats are released for reservation *48 hours* in advance of departure.

    Reservations for shuttles are available **April 18, 2024**. Additional seats will be released in a rolling window, at 8 am MDT two days prior to departure day.

    When: May to October.

    More info can be found <a href='https://parks.canada.ca/pn-np/ab/banff/visit/parkbus/louise#parkscanadashuttles'>here</a>.

2. **Take Roam Public Transit**
    
    Riders departing from Canmore or Banff who purchase the Roam Public Transit ‘superpass’ can connect to Moraine Lake via the Parks Canada Lake Connector Shuttle upon arrival at the Lake Louise Lakeshore. 
    Riders can reconnect with the Roam Public Transit system by returning to the Lake Louise Lakeshore on the Parks Canada Lake Connector Shuttle.

    Route 10: Moraine Louise Express; When: Fall service only, daily between mid-September to mid-October.


3. **Bike the Moraine Lake Road** 
   
    ***Bicycles/e-bikes*** will be allowed on Moraine Lake Road. The journey is **25** km round trip. 