---
title: Future Directions for Anomaly Detection
subtitle: I give an overview of the future directions of Anomalous SED.
authors: Simon Li
layout: default
date: 2024-03-03
keywords: machine learning
tags: ml
published: true
---

In this note, I summarize a list of promising future directions for anomaly detection based on the <a href='https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/s11042-021-11817-9.pdf'>survey</a>

## Future Work

### Rare and Imbalanced Data
Recent works have addressed this problem usually employing either **data augmentation** or a **tailored learning method**, where a higher weight is attributed to the least represented class. 

#### Data Augmentation
Data augmentation is gerenated by either replication or simulation. Previous works attempted to utilize **GAN** for generate virtual data categorically. In addition, a novel method, based on **Dynamic Time Warping (DTW)** has been proposed, which can be achieved by the following steps:
1. Randomly sample multiple instances from a category
2. Rescale each instance
3. Randomly generate a weight vector
4. Compute the weighted DTW average using the weight vector and the intances

#### Weighted Learning 
Researchers have previously attempted to utilize the calss weights in objective function while training to cope with the issue of data imbalance. An elaborated approach is proposed to map the input to clusters in an embedding space, balancing the learning by incorporating **inter-cluster** and **inter-class margins**. Then, the approach uses a novel objective function to learn the embeddings, qualified as **triple-header cross-entropy**. This approach has proven to be effective for SED with imbalanced data. 

Recently, researchers also proposed a novel approach for hazardous events detection using **type-2 fuzzy set**. Since the hazardous events are a minority in the dataset, the weights of such classes have been manipulated in the **type-2 fuzzy membership** function, such that the weights of each class are **inversely proportional** to the class samples. Then, a **membership degree** is calculated using two components, an *upper/optimistic* membership component and a *lower/pessimistic* component. Finally, **interval comparison** is performed to select the event for which the membership is the highest. 

### Temporal Dimension
A previous research attempted to study the effect of temporal evolution of the input signal on the performance of audio surveillance RNN models. The results of the research show that sequential models oare **not neccessarily** the best fit for temporal data and that **optimization of the temporal** dimension is still an open problem. 

### Computational Efficiency
A recent work developed a novel parallel method for extracting features from spectrograms using MapReduce model in Hadoop. The obtained results show a better computational time efficiency and a higher recognition rate of critical acoustic events in different noisy conditions. 